So let's develop a more practical
use of the central limit theorem.
Recall that the sample meet is
approximately normal distributed with
population mean equal to mu and standard
deviation equal to the standard error of
the means sigma over square root 10.
In this distribution, mu plus 2 standard
errors is pretty far out in the tail.
With only a 2.5% chance of a normal being
larger than two standard deviations in
the, the tail.
Similarly, mu minus 2 standard error
is pretty far in the left tail,
with only a 2.5% chance of a normal being
smaller than two standard deviations in
the left tail.
So the probability that x bar is bigger
than mu plus 2 standard errors or
smaller than mu minus 2
standard errors is 5%.
Where equivalently, the probability
that mu is between these limits is 95%.
We can reverse the role of
x bar mu without changing
the probability inequalities and get the,
get that the quantity x bar plus or
minus 2 standard errors contains
mu with probability 95%.
Remember here, that we're treating
the interval as random x bar plus or
minus 2 standard errors,
while mu is fixed.
So we talked about the probability
that the interval contains mu.
The actual interpretation of this is that
if we were to repeatedly get samples of
size n from this population.
Construct a confidence
interval in each case.
About 95% of the intervals we
obtained would contain mu,
the parameter that we're
trying to estimate.
I would note that I get the 2 by
rounding up the 97.5th quantile,
which is closer to 1.96.
If you wanted a 90% interval,
what you need is 5% in either tail.
So you would replace the 2 with 1.645.
Let's go through a simple example.
Consider the father.son data
from the using r package.
To find x to be the son's height,
I'm simply going to take mean of x plus or
minus the 0.975th normal quantile
times the standard error of the mean.
Standard deviation of x divided
by the square root of n,
which is the length of the vector x.
I divided by 12 so
that my confidence interval will
be in feet rather than inches.
And I get the confidence
interval 5.710 to 5.738.
So if we were willing to assume that
the sons from this data were and
ideal draw from a population of interest.
Then the confidence interval for
the average height to the sons
would be 5.71 to 5.74.
Let's consider coin flips in
developing confidence interval for
the success probability of the coin.
So, in this case, each observation xi, is
a 0 or 1 with a common success probably p.
And remember the variance of coin flip
was p times 1 minus p, where again,
p is the true success
probability of the coin.
Remember, then, the standard error of the
mean is square p times 1 minus p over n.
So the interval takes of the form,
p hat plus or
minus the normal quantile times
square root p times 1 minus p over n.
We don't know p,
it's what we want to estimate.
And so we don't have the standard error,
but we would replace it by p hat.
And this is a confidence interval that
is called the Wald confidence intervals,
named after the great statistician Wald.
It turns out p times 1 minus p is as
large as it can be when p equals a half,
so that square root p times
1 minus p is one-half.
And when we multiply it times the 2 in
the 95% interval, those cancel out and
we get that for
95% intervals, p hat plus or
minus 1 over square root n is a very
quick confidence interval estimate for p.
Imagine you were running for political
office and your campaign advisor told you
that in a random sample of 100 likely
voters, 56 intended to vote for you.
Can you relax?
Do you have this race in the bag?
Is 0.56 out of 100 sampled
enough evidence to
conclude that you'll likely
get more than 50% of the vote?
But you don't have access to a computer or
calculator.
So what you do is you do 1 over
square root 100, which yields 0.1.
So the back-of-the-envelope
calculation gives
an approximate 95%
interval of 0.46 to 0.66.
The confidence interval says that we can't
rule out possibilities below 0.5 with
95% confidence.
So, not enough for you to relax, and
you'd better go do more campaigning.
So, some general rough guidelines is that
you need 100 for one decimal place in
a binomial experiment, 10,000 for
two, and a million for three.
Here I just give 1 over
the square root of a bunch of
powers of 10 just to illustrate that.
Here I just go through
the calculation where I
plug 0.56 directly into
the standard area formula.
So we have 0.56 plus or minus the relevant
standard normal quantile times
square root 0.56 times 0.44 over 100.
This yields the interval 0.46
to 0.66 just like before.
Also the function binom.test with 56
successes out of 100 trials in grabbing
the confidence interval component yields
a very similar interval, 0.46 to 0.66.
The binom.test function is exactly
the sense that it yields 95% coverage or
higher, regardless of the size N.
These so called exact procedures
are a nice compliment to
large sample procedures.
They tend to involve computations
that cannot be done by hand and
can be conservative.
I have wider intervals, but
nonetheless they do not rely
on the Central Limit Theorem.
Let's consider a simulation.
Here I'm going to do a simulation
where I flip a coin with a given
success probability over and
over and over again.
And calculate the percentage
of times my walled interval
covers the true coin probability
that we used to generate the data.
So I'm going to say, in each one of my
simulations I'm going to do 20 coin flips.
The true values of the success probability
of the coin that I'd like to look at,
vary between 0.1 and 0.9 where I
step through them by value 0.05.
I'm going to do 1,000 simulations.
And then I'm going to loop over the,
these true success probabilities.
And for each true success probability
I'm going to generate 1,000 sets
of 10 coin flips where I take
the sample proportion in each case.
Then I'm going to calculate the lower
limit of the confidence interval in
each of those cases.
And the upper limit of the confidence
interval in each of those cases.
And I'm going to calculate
the proportion of times that they can
cover that true value of p that
I used to simulate the data.
This will all be in this variable
that I'm calling coverage.
Now what I'd like to do is plot
coverage as the function of
the true success probability
I used to simulate the data.
Here I show the plot of the coverage by
the true values of p used for simulation.
So, for example,
at the value 0.5 I flipped
the coin ten times, took the sample
proportion, found the confidence interval,
and then gave it a one if it
covered the value 0.5 or not.
I did that 1,000 times and
in this case over 95% of the time it
did in fact cover that probability.
So it's basically saying if
the true value of p was 0.5 and
I do a confidence interval the coverage
is actually better than 95% a little bit.
There is some Monte Carlo error, right?
In that I didn't do an infinite
number of simulations.
I only did 1,000, but
1,000 is pretty good, right?
As we saw in a couple slide ago it's
giving us a little bit better than one
decimal place accuracy.
Now, here, it's pretty clear that
I'm getting nowhere near 95%
confidence level for the case where
the p is around here around 12% or so.
Now why is this the case?
Why is it that a 95% confidence
interval procedure is
clearly giving us coverage less than 95%?
And it's simply because the central
limit theorem isn't as accurate,
isn't as accurate as we need it to be for
this specific value of N for
coins with this specific true probability.
So, I'll give you a quick fix to address
this problem for smaller values of n.
The quick fix, is to simply take your
number of successes x and add 2, and
your number of failures and also add 2.
So that your p hat is now
x plus 2 over n plus 4.
So adding two successes and failures.
Then you just churn through the confidence
interval procedure as normal.
But with this new sample proportion that's
been shrunk towards 0.5 a little bit.
This is called the Agresti/Coull interval.
And in a minute we'll show you how
it performs a little bit better.
Before I show the results for adding
two successes and adding two failures,
I want to simply show that the performance
is the better when n is larger.
Here, I've done exactly the same
simulation that turned n
into 100 rather than 20.
And here you see the coverage probability
as a function of the different values of
p, only now the only difference is that
within each conference interval that I
simulated, I use a greater
number of coin flips.
So in each case, take for
example this point right here.
For that specific true value of p,
I simulated 100 coin flips.
Took the sample proportion,
created the confidence interval and
saw if it contained this true value of p.
In over 95% of the instances
that was the case.
You see here's the 95% line right here and
you see that the, the coverage probability
is fairly close to it throughout, it never
dips below 90 like it did in the 20 case.
Now, let's look back at the 20 case again.
So I'm setting n equal to 20.
Okay?
But now, when I calculate my
confidence interval here,
notice that I am adding two successes and
two failures.
So lets see the performance of that.
And you can see that the add two successes
and add two failures interval, tends to
cover the true success probability with
a higher percentage of time than 95%.
This is a little bit better than
the extremely poor coverage of
the Wald interval for
certain values of the true probability.
However, being too conservative,
in other words,
having too high of a coverage rate is
also not necessarily a good thing,
as it implies that the interval's
probably too wide.
Nonetheless I have done some thinking
about this specific problem and I could
give a very categorical recommendation
that the add 2 successes and
2 failures interval should generally
be used instead of the Wald interval.
Lets create a poisson interval
using the estimate plus or
minus normal quantile standard
error of an estimate formula.
This is based on the central limit theorem
though it's maybe a little less clear how
the central limit theorem
is applying in this case.
I'll talk about that
a little bit in a minute.
So let's talk about a nuclear pump
that failed 5 times out of 94.32 days,
given 95% confidence interval for
the failure rate per day.
So I'm going to assume that my
number of failures is Poisson
with failure rate lambda and
t being the number of days.
So my estimate of the failure rate is
the number of failures divided
by the total monitoring time.
The variance of this estimate
turns out to be lambda over t.
So that lambda hat over t is our
empirical variance estimate.
Here I just go through
the calculations in r.
I define my number of events here as x
being 5, the monitoring time is 94.32.
My estimate of the rate as x over t, and
my confidence interval estimate
as the rate estimate plus or
minus the relevant standard normal
quantile times the standard error, and
then I round it so that I only
get three decimal place accuracy.
So here is my estimate for the rate,
my 95% confidence interval estimate for
the rate.
In addition to doing
a large sample interval,
we can do an exact Poisson interval,
and R has a function for doing it.
It's poisson.test.
We give it the number of events.
And the monitoring time, and then you can
just grab conference interval compart,
part of it, and
there it gives the exact Poisson interval.
What I mean by exact here,
again, is that it guarantees the coverage,
but that might be conservative.
It might give you a wider
interval than necessary, but
it will guarantee 95% coverage.
Just because we're very interested in
seeing how confidence intervals perform on
repeated samplings since that defines our
idea of what a confidence interval is.
Let's repeat the process that we did for
the coin, for the Poisson coverage rate.
So let's pick a set of lambda values,
kind of near the ones from our example.
Let's do 1,000 simulations.
Let's set our monitoring time as 100
instead of 94 just to make it simple.
And then, I'm going to define
coverage in the same way.
I'm going to simulate a bunch of
Poissons with this particular rate, and
then I'm going to divide it
by the monitoring time to get
a vector of lambda hats
over 1,000 simulations.
I'm then going to create my
95% confidence interval by
constructing the lower
limit where I subtract off
the standard normal quantile times
the standard error, and then a bunch of
upper limits where I add the standard
normal quantile times the standard error.
And then I'm going to take
the percentage of times that my
interval contains the true lambda used for
simulation.
And I'm going to do that over
a series of lambda values and
then in the next slide,
I'm going to show you the plot of
the lambda values by the monte
carlo estimated coverage.
So here's the plot of our
lambda values by the coverage.
So every point in this plot is
an instance where we simulated and
repeatedly generated Poisson confidence
intervals and took the percentage of
time that those intervals contained the
true lambda value used for the simulation.
We can see as the lambda values get
larger, the coverage gets closer to 95%.
There is of course some monte carlo air
because we didn't do an infinite number of
simulations, only 1,000.
We also see that as lambda as the true
value of lambda gets smaller,
the coverage gets very poor and I don't.
You probably can't see this
number terribly well here.
So, I'll zoom in.
That coverage is 50% right there.
So your purported 95% interval is
only giving you 50% actual coverage.
So our brief simulation here is
suggesting that for very small values of
lambda which we have a good sense of if
we could have relatively few events for
a large amount of monitoring time.
For relatively small values
of lambda we shouldn't be
using this asymptotic interval.
Since it's not immediately clear how
the central limit theorem works in
the Poisson case I just wanted to
put up one simulation to show that
what's going to infinity to
make the Poisson case have very
good approximations using
the central limit theorem.
And basically as the monitoring
time goes to infinity,
the coverage will converge to 95%.
So in this simulation, I changed t from
100 to 1,000 so that we're monitoring
not for a total of 94.32 days, but
a total monitoring time of the 1,000 days.
And here we see that the coverage, if we
look at the reference line here at 95%,
the coverage is much, much,
much better for most values of lambda.
There is some poor coverage down here
near, near the smaller values of lambda,
but we know that this interval has
problems with small values of lambda.
But remember in this case, we do have
the exact Poisson interval as an option.
So congratulations on making it
through this marathon lecture.
Because there was so much content,
I'd like to summarize very briefly.
First of all we cover
the law of large numbers.
And that simply states that averages
of IID random variables converges to
the things that they're estimating.
I would also add that it also shows
that Poisson rates converge to the rates
that they're estimating, though it's maybe
a little less clear how that works, but
as the monitoring time goes to infinity,
for example.
The central limit theorem is also
a theorem involving averages and
it states that averages
are approximately normal.
With distributions centered at the
population mean, which we knew regardless
of the central limit theorem, and with
standard deviations equal to the standard
error of the mean, which we already
knew without the central limit theorem.
However the central limit
theorem also tells us
that they're approximately normal.
However, the central limit theorem doesn't
give any guarantee that n is large enough
for this approximation to be accurate and
we've seen some instances with confidence
intervals where it's very accurate and
instances where it's less accurate.
Speaking of confidence intervals
taking the mean and adding and
subtracting the relevant normal
quantile times the standard error
yields a confidence interval for the mean.
And this process of estimate plus or
minus some sort of quantile times
the standard error is our default way for
creating confidence intervals.
Whether it's in this context or
in our regression class.
Or even when we're talking about
general isolinear models and
more complex subjects.
We tend to use these so
called walled intervals.
The specific case where we want
a 95% confidence interval, you can
take 2 as the quantile or if you want to
be a little bit more accurate, use 1.96.
Now confidence intervals get wider
as the coverage increases if
you're staying within a single technique.
Now why would this be the case?
So imagine if someone were to
put a gun to your head, and say,
unless this conference interval contains
the true parameters it's estimating I'm
going to pull the trigger, which is
a ridiculous circumstance, but humor me.
What would you do?
Well, you certainly don't want them to,
to pull the trigger.
Right?
So you, what you would do
is you'd make the conference intervals
as wide as you possibly could.
Because you want to be very sure that
the interval contains the parameter.
So that's the same thing
that the mathematics does.
The more sure you want the, the more sure
that you want to be that the interval will
contain the parameter, the wider
the procedure makes the interval.
If you don't care at all, if you want
a 2% confidence interval and only,
then you're going to have an interval
that's very close to the mean itself.
Now the Poisson and binomial cases
are discreet cases, and we saw that
the central limit theorem can sometimes
not approximate their distributions well.
And in those cases there
are exact procedures.
But we also saw a simple fix for
the binomial case if you're
creating confidence intervals.
Where if you add two successes and
you add two failures,
you get a much better confidence
interval with out much extra thinking or
having to resort to something
that requires a computer.
So you can still do that calculation
by hand if you happen to be or, or
in your head if you,
if you happen to be not around a computer.